so as astrophysicists the one thing that
we feel like we've got a good handle on
is understanding galaxy shapes right
we've observed over a million different
galaxies in
all different places in the sky in all
different directions with loads of
different telescopes over the centuries
and we now have this classification
system that we can classify them and
label them as like good little
scientists so we can understand them all
how everything fits together and then
sometimes
things like this come along and just
confuse us
entirely so this is ngc
474 a galaxy roughly about 100 million
light years away
in the direction of the constellation
pisces on the sky
it's about 250 000
light years across from side to side
that's 2.5
times bigger than the milky way so it's
a
big galaxy it probably has over like 500
billion stars at least maybe even up to
a trillion
stars in it now if we just ignore
the sort of mess going on around the
outside
for the minute that is sort of a bit
chaotic and we don't really understand
and we just look at the very
center of this galaxy which is all we
tend to see when we look at it
sort of with smaller telescopes you know
for not very long exposures so that we
don't actually pick up the sort of very
faint features around the outside
then what we see is that ngc 474
is a blob galaxy essentially it's sort
of like a sphere
of stars right unlike its little
companion galaxy
above it which is ngc 470 which is very
clearly a very beautiful
spiral shape which is much flatter like
a disc or
a frisbee and these are the two main
types of galaxies that we see
wherever we look in the universe these
spherical bobs in these spiral shapes
like our own galaxy
the milky way now spiral galaxies tend
to be found in much
emptier regions of space just like the
milky way and andromeda it's sort of
local group of galaxies that are
actually in one of the biggest voids in
the universe i've made a video on that
before if you want to go check it out
i'll link it
up here whereas the spherical blob
shaped galaxies they tend to be found
sort of clustered together
in huge groups of galaxies in much
denser areas of the universe
and so what we've realized sort of from
looking at that and from sort of
looking at simulations that we've done
of how the universe has evolved to sort
of give us the galaxy shapes that we see
around us today
we've come up with this model that's
called hierarchical galaxy formation
which essentially means that over
billions and billions of years as the
universe evolves
galaxies merge together slowly
over time to build up their mass merging
with more and more and more galaxies
to build up these blob galaxies because
if you have a merger of galaxies
that really destroys that beautiful
spiral
structure in all sort of the rearranging
of everything in
the merger so this is why we think that
we find spiral galaxies
left alone instead of these voids in the
universe where they're sort of left
alone to their own devices and can stay
beautiful spirals
and why we find these blob galaxies in
clusters or groups now ngc 474 however
is found in a relatively empty region of
space you know just to
throw the cat amongst the pigeons and
keep us all on our toes
except of course for its little
companion friend galaxy ngc
470 which actually gives us a clue
to explaining this weird structure
around ngc 474 now that weird structure
means that
it's actually classed as what's called a
shell galaxy
shell galaxies were first discovered by
halton arp who in 1966
after four years of telescope
observations compiled his
atlas of peculiar galaxies and let me
tell you
reading through this atlas is ridiculous
because it's literally like
the guidebook for this series on my
channel of space is weird and it just
contains
all of the weird and wonderful galaxies
in the universe and remember
weird is a good thing here's the poster
child for shell galaxies though this is
ngc
3923 and it has over 40 of these
concentric sort of shell-like structures
around it that sort of stars
arranged in these tight layers i like to
think of it sort of like an onion
of stars ogres have layers onions have
layers
now it turns out that 10 of these sort
of spherical
blob like galaxies actually do have
these shell-like
structures and they're the ones that are
found in the
empty regions of space just like ngc
474 and the explanation
that people have come up with to explain
these weird shell-like structures
is something called galactic cannibalism
which it's just the most horrendous term
right to describe it
but the way that galactic cannibalism
say differs from say a galaxy merger
where you have
two galaxies that come together and so
of all their structure is destroyed and
you essentially make a whole new galaxy
and mold the new galaxy out of the two
that you originally had
galactic cannibalism is when one galaxy
is so much
larger that instead of sort of merging
with the other one to form something
new the other one literally is on a
trajectory that takes it right into the
center of the bigger galaxy and the
bigger galaxy sort of just
absorbs that galaxy and makes the stars
in it its own and what you can think of
it like
is sort of like dropping a pebble you
know into
a pond and watching the ripples travel
out right
so your pebble is the smaller galaxy
that's about to get
eaten in this galactic cannibalism
process
and the pond is the much larger galaxy
and is sort of you you drop
it in there's these shock waves sent out
into the galaxy as it sort of absorbs
that process of eating that galaxy up
and you see that shock wave of energy
traveling out in these
ripples that create shell layers in the
galaxy this onion-like structure
oh you both have layers
now in ngc 3923 that's really easy to
see
but in ngc 474 it's it's not as clear
cut
and as you move further out from the
galaxy those
shell layers start to get a bit warped
and
have their own structure as if they're
not ripples at all
in fact those arcs on the outskirts of
the galaxy actually look
more like um tidal tails that we call it
so these are galaxies that might have
come in
and been shredded by tidal forces where
the gravitational force is stronger on
one side of the galaxy than the other
and so it gets stretched out into this
sort of long arc so it's not
fully like merged with the galaxy in the
middle or been sort of completely eaten
and cannibalized
by it instead it's just sort of been
completely ripped apart it all seems to
depend when we
sort of look at computer simulations of
these sort of interactions between sort
of a bigger galaxy and a small galaxy
on the trajectory of that incoming
smaller galaxy
right if it's going to glance around the
galaxy it's probably going to form one
of these big arcs as it gets torn apart
wherever it's on a trajectory that
brings it straight in on sort of a
collision course
it's going to undergo this galactic
cannibalism and form
these sort of shell-like ripple
structures through the galaxy
but along with seeing both the shell
structure and
the sort of tidal tail arcs there's also
that larger
spiral companion galaxy 2 that's roughly
at the same distance so it's likely that
eventually these two galaxies
will merge together and create a new
blob galaxy
so it seems like we've got everything
going on in ngc 474 right we're gonna
have a merger in maybe a million to a
billion years or so who knows
we've had galactic cannibalism at some
point make these shell
structures we've had galactic harassment
making these arc-like structures
and all in a region of space which is
relatively empty
where a galaxy should have pretty much
been left alone to its own
devices to just you know evolve however
it light without being harassed and
cannibalized in all sorts
and so what we actually think ngc 474 is
very likely to be
is something we call a fossil group
essentially we think there used to be
quite a big group of galaxies there that
were probably all spiral shaped to begin
with looking beautiful
and over the you know billions of years
of evolution
of the universe they've all eventually
merged together or been cannibalized or
been you know
torn apart by tidal interactions and
over time formed this one giant blob
of a galaxy and just that little
companion that's left
to merge with it and so all of
these tidal tales structures and and
shell-like structures
that are left behind in this mess
essentially
is this fossil record of what has
happened to this galaxy
in the past and it blows my mind
that like we as humans are able to
read that fossil history of that galaxy
by observing other things in the
universe and by doing simulations
we've been able to sort of piece
together a whodunit
for this galaxy right what the most
likely history
for this galaxy is and what's incredible
as well is that with simulations
we can try and recreate this exact
structure of this galaxy and sort of say
well what did we have to start with
to get this then we can also run it
forward
as well and we can see what might happen
in the future
of the weird and very wonderful ngc
474 a process that we call galactic
cannibalism cannibalism
galactic cannibalism kind of
galactic cannibalism i'm talking too
many bees and i cannot
ganactic nope galactic cannibalism
seriously
like some of the names that we give to
stuff is ridiculous like it just it
makes it sound like ng2474 is there like
i ate that little galaxy with the some
fava beans and a nice chianti
oh my gosh look what just turned off
mid filming it's my ipad
if those of you don't follow me on
instagram won't know that um i have been
waiting for this to come forever
because i want to start like a digital
research like lab notebook i want
everything to be like digitized and i
annotate all of my journal articles and
pdfs and i'm just so excited and now i
have to be patient
while i film and wait to set it up
things i do for you oh there's an
autocorrect typo in my notes
[Music]
instead of saying groups and clusters of
galaxy it says
goops and clusters of galaxies
now i'm going to start using that oh
yeah a group of galaxies it's the new
plural